okay so here's the cyclic quadrilateral quadra
theorem that we've introduced as a replacement
for the brahmagupta and robbins formulas
expressing the quadra of a cyclic quadrilateral
in terms of a quadratic equation involving
two quantities which are obtained from the
four quadrances of that cyclic quadrilateral and
these uh things intimately connected with the
quadruple quad formula so a natural question might
be why is this a quadratic equation if we're given
four quadratures surely there's more than just two
possible cyclic quadrilaterals that we can cook up
by rearranging these line segments in
different ways some convex and some non-convex
so let's have a little look at that
it's an interesting aspect of this story
so let's switch to a b c d in terms of
side lengths and go back to brahmagupta's
formulation of things so here is a cyclic
quadrilateral with sides a b c and d and here is
another one with the same side lengths and what
we've done is we've sort of reshuffled the order
of these line segments around in
the same circle why is it that
the areas of these two things are going to be
the same so here's a relatively easy argument
so the area of this quadrilateral is the union of
these four areas here's the center of the circle
each of these are isosceles triangles because
one of the sides is a radius of the circle okay
so this quadrants and this quadrants are equal all
these four quadrants are equal and that means that
this triangle here which we've denoted a and
this triangle over here denoted a are actually
the same triangles they're congruent triangles
because these two sides are both the quadrants of
the circle and here this length and this length
are the same so these areas match up and these
two areas match up and these two areas match up
and these two areas match up and that allows us
to see that even if we reshuffle the orders
of these four line segments along the circle
that the actual area or quadra of the
cyclic quadrilateral doesn't change
so as an exercise you can convince yourself
that this is also true in the non-convex case
it's a little bit more subtle there so here is
a non-convex quadrilateral with sides lengths a
b c and d okay and i've drawn the same kinds
of triangles emanating from the center just
join the various four vertices with the center
so i have these four isosceles triangles so that
would be one and uh and this very narrow one here
would be another and then this one here would be
another and then this one here would be another
and over here i've used the same size circle and
rearranged these line segments so there's a
there and this d i moved over here like this
this b here i rearranged to go up here and see
the range to go here you might say how does
one know that we can actually do this well you
can deduce this from the the positions of these
triangles so you have to think about this
triangle a and this triangle d so that angle
and that angle classical sense and that angle
and that angle there are going to be the same
and they're going to be the same as this angle
here the b triangle together with this angle
here in the c triangle over here there's the b one
and there's the c one all right so i'll give some
thought to this situation so this is illustrating
the the idea that even though we can in fact
use the same circle and create different looking
quadrilaterals with those same four side lengths
be it convex or non-convex the
areas are not going to change
okay the areas are not going to change and
that's why there's really a quadratic equation
in this cyclic quadrilateral quadrature
theorem and not some higher degree equation
because there's really only two possibilities
for the quadra of the quadrilateral
given the quadrances of the four sides so i want
to show you how this new theorem incorporates
the brahma gupta and robbins formulas it's
kind of a restatement or way of putting them
together and it really relies really only on
the arguments that we've had in the last video
but this is really only a temporary proof
because ultimately we want to establish
this result independently of any prior theory real
numbers any notions of square roots and distances
and lengths so we are going to have to come
up with a completely independent proof of this
but in the meantime this is a way of connecting
it with the formulas of brahmagupta and robbins
so here's our quadrilateral a1a2a3a4 i've drawn
it as a convex one but it's not necessary that
it's convex here are the side lengths a b c d and
we'll use that notation as well as the quadrants
uh formulas so that the quadrants q 1 2 is just a
squared q 2 3 is b squared q 3 4 is c squared and
q 1 4 is d squared okay so brahma gupta's identity
which is what we got when we looked at the
quadruple quad formula applied to these four
quadrances as squares of distances now we saw
that that factored into a product of eight factors
and the first four we can group together as a1
and the second four we can group together as
a2 let me call this p for a later reference
okay and here's the kind of formula
that we obtained for a1 and a2 so a1 was
remember part of the difference of squares
and with some formula like this actually we
were using a asymmetrical form instead of this one
so i'll replace that now with a symmetrical form
so there was some quantity involving the a's b's
c's and d's all squared so i'm replacing them with
just these quadrances and then plus eight a b c d
perhaps you can remember that that was essentially
the brahmagupta's uh formula for the the quadra
of a convex cyclic quadrilateral and then the
second factor product of the next four terms had
a similar kind of expression but with a minus sign
minus eight a b c d and that was essentially
the quadra of a non-convex quadrilateral
and that was basically robin's formula so i'm
rewriting things from our last video okay now what
we can do with these two things is first of all
we know that their product is well we're calling
it p which is this quantity right here but we can
also observe now that if we take the sum of these
the sum then these two terms here will will
cancel and we'll just get this term here times two
okay so what is m well m is just
this quantity right here okay
so we get that a1 and a2 are two quantities whose
sum we know which is 2m and whose product we know
is p well that means that a1 a2 in fact satisfy
a quadratic equation well the form a squared
minus 2m a plus p equals 0. because i remind
you that if you have a quadratic equation of
the form say x minus r times x minus s okay then
the the last term will be the product r times s
and what's inside here will be negative
the sum of the two zeros r and s
so this quadratic equation which is really the
cyclic quadrilateral quadria theorem it's a
way of putting together the brahmagupta and the
robbins formulas to eliminate any dependence on
a b c d so now these quantities m and p only
depend on the q's and not on the abcs and these
okay because the sum of these two things was
2m so this is just m and the p was just this
quadruple quad function applied to
these four quadrances it's now purely
rational reformulation of both the brahmagupta
and the robin's formulas sort of at the same time
and circumventing now any need for a
discussion about convex or non-convex
both cases are covered by this one so now
let's do the same thing that we did for the
brahmagupta and robbins formulas to illustrate
the theorem by looking carefully at a concrete
example where we can see everything laid out so
we are adopting a rational point of view we're
going to not use any floating point arithmetic
we want full integer arithmetic at all times
here's our unit circle which is what we're going
to use and we have to have four points on it and
i'm going to choose four rational points on
the circle which are roughly in the same kinds
of positions as their real number example ones
that i did before okay roughly but not exactly
so a1 will be the point one zero a2 will be up
here it'll be the point three fifths four fifths
we recognize this is a point that's
exactly on the unit circle because 3
squared plus 4 squared equals 5 squared
that's our favorite pythagorean triple
this point a3 wouldn't choose to be minus 12 over
13 5 over 13. we recognize another pythagorean
triple 5 12 and 13. and over here a4 we're going
to choose 15 over 17 and minus 8 over 17. there's
another pythagorean triple 8 15 and 17 there now
we know how to rationally parameterize the circle
let me remind you that if you take any rational
number t then you can cook up a corresponding
point on the circle by choosing 1 minus t squared
over 1 plus t squared to be the x coordinate
and 2 times t over 1 plus t squared to be the y
coordinate so i don't have to choose simple ones
like this i have a whole wide variety of points
that i could choose pretty well anywhere i want
to be points on this unit circle with
rational coefficients okay what's the
next ingredient well here's our quadrilateral
and we want now to calculate the quadrances
note that i'm denoting the quadrances here with
a little rectangle along the sides alerting us to
the fact that we're working with quadrances and
not distances so q12 how do we calculate that
well we just take the difference between the x
coordinates and square it the difference in the
y coordinates and square it so that'll be two
fifths all squared and four fifths all squared
that'll be two squared is 4 4 squared is 16. you
add them together you get 20. so 20 over 25 which
is four-fifths and similarly you can work
out the quadrants between these two will be
162 over 65 the quadrants between these two
will be 882 over 221 and the quadrants between
a4 and a1 is 4 over 17. okay so we've got those
four quadrances now we need these two quantities p
and m p was the quadruple quad function
applied to these four quadrances
okay so it was that biggest formula that
we've seen that comes from the geometry
of the line it's the relationship between
the quadrances of the four points on a line
okay we know what that is we
can calculate that i get my
computer to do it and i get that number
there it's a biggish fraction but that's
what we expect when we're doing this
kind of rational number arithmetic
and the quantity m well that was this expression
here that we saw in the last few slides
and that turns out to be this quantity right here
so m and p are going to be the ingredients to
create this quadratic formula for the quadra
of this quadrilateral 16 times the area
squared so let's see what that looks like now
all right so the quadratic equation that we
get looks like this a squared minus 2m a plus p
and that's going to be equal to zero it's a
quadratic equation so we naturally ask does it
factor well it turns out it does factor
okay so it's a pleasant fact that if we
get rid of this denominator out front here
then the two linear factors are these ones
and then we get two solutions one of
them is let's see one million sixty five
thousand and twenty four over forty eight thousand
eight hundred forty one which is approximately
twenty one point eight four and then the other
one is minus 21 312 over 244 thousand 205.
these are the two solutions to this quadratic
equation that the cyclic quadrilateral quadra
theorem gives us so what's the significance well
this is the actual number that we want this is 16
times the square of the area of this quadrilateral
and i remind you this is not too far from the real
number example that we got when we looked at some
real uh points close to being on the unit circle
which formed a quadratic roughly in a similar
kind of position i think that was around 19.
what's the meaning of this there's a negative
sign here we're getting the other possible
quadrant to be negative this is supposed to be 16
times the area squared how can that possibly be
the algebra is telling us that these four
quadrances form a convex quadrilateral namely
the one we have there but if we try to form a
non-convex cyclic quadrilateral using those same
length segments or same quadrants segments we are
not going to be able to do it that's why we're
getting a negative number here it's the algebra
telling us that the other case which is the
non-context one of robin in this case doesn't
exist because of the particular relationships
between the four quadrances that we've chosen
so there's something else that we should do
here we should look at the analog of the robin's
formula so looking at a non-convex cyclic
quadrilateral and we can try this one a1 a2 a4 a3
and you might like to work this out as an exercise
before i'm about to show it to you okay so
if you like this kind of algebra you have
a computer there you're happy to make some
algebraic calculations see if you can work this
out and see if we're going to get the same answers
and let's just remind ourselves that we
still do need a correct proof of this
cyclic quadrilateral quadra theorem okay that's
still something that we owe you to see so we
are going to come back and do that in some later
video so now let's have a look at this non-convex
situation and see that the robbins formula
is actually also incorporated here into this
this kind of formulation all right so let's
have a look at this non-convex situation that
i asked you to do in the previous exercise so
here we have a1 a2 a4 a3 same points as we had
before so that's the point one zero that's three
fifths four fifths that's minus twelve thirteen
is five thirteenths and this one fifteen
seventeenths and minus eight seventeenths
so now the four quadrances are these
ones here and here they are right here
and the quantity p which is the quadruple quad
formula acting on these four gives us this number
the quantity m which is their sum squared minus
twice the sum of their squares turns out to be
this one and here is the actual statement
of the theorem that the quadria of this
cyclic quadrilateral satisfies this quadratic
equation with this is the m and this is the p
let's have a look what happens there okay so this
is what ends up happening here is the quadratic
equation given by our theorem there's the m
value there's the p value and after a common
denominator is peeled off then it factors as
a product of linear factors very pleasantly
and the two solutions are then this
number which is approximately 1.78
and this number which is approximately 74.7
and in this case the answer that we want is
this one here which is not too far from the
example that we showed you in the real case
with similar uh position points this
one here is exactly the same as the
quadria of this cyclic quadrilateral
so it turns out to be exactly the same
the formula for the quadri is 16 times and then
there was that quantity involving x1
y2 minus x2 y1 where you take the four
coordinates and substitute it into that sort of
alternating expression and square it all right so
you do that you get exactly this number here
so we can verify the theorem exactly in this
example you see many advantages in working in this
rational concrete logical way it's a definitely
a big step up from the ambiguity and the
imprecision of working in real number arithmetic
here's a bit of a fun challenge for you
can you find a convex cyclic quadrilateral
with the same quadrances which has this
quadria the other solution in this case
does have some physical significance because we
can in fact find at least approximately find a
a cyclic quadrilateral perhaps with a different
size circle in fact almost certainly with a
different size circle because it's
quadra is much bigger okay that has
the same quadrances but it's a cyclic one okay
so a bit of a challenge to to find that and to
to make uh make sure that you get exactly the
same thing with exactly the same quadrances
okay so that's been very exciting we've
established a new way of thinking about a
very classical result we've reconfigured
things so that the ambiguity or the
the dichotomy between the brahmagupta and the
robbins formulas are now sort of incorporated into
the single quadratic equation so the algebra is
somehow taking care of these geometrically perhaps
different situations at the same time so it turns
out that this way of thinking this kind of formula
has in fact in the last few decades been found
very useful not just in planar geometry but also
in planar geometry but also in three-dimensional
geometry so next time i want to just sort of in
the spirit of investigating these kinds of ideas
i want to talk a little bit more about some
additional lovely formulas of robins having to
do with the area of cyclic pentagon and hexagon
and i also want to talk about some remarkable
work that's involved with uh with polyhedra
something called the bellows conjecture and a
very lovely theorem of sabotaf so that'll be a
quite interesting stuff some of it not very old at
all in fact and you can see that the same spirit
of working rationally is in fact naturally adopted
by many modern practitioners in this branch of
geometry so what we're doing here would not be
considered particularly novel at all by by certain
modern geometers right i hope you'll join me for
that i'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening